.\" Copyright (c) 2012-2013 Michael Scholz <mi-scholz@users.sourceforge.net>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" @(#)README.man	1.25 10/15/13
.\"
.Dd October 15, 2013
.Dt README
.Os
.\"
.\" NAME
.\"
.Sh NAME
.Nm README
.Nd installation information for the Fth package
.\"
.\" INTRODUCTION
.\"
.Sh INTRODUCTION
.Em Fth
is a software package which includes the interpreter 
.Ic fth 
and the extension library
.Ic libfth .
You can write Forth scripts and interpret them by the interpreter fth
or you can link libfth into an application to use it as extension
language.
.Pp
Fth's core language is Ficl, a Forth dialect written by John Sadler.
The Ficl source is included in the Fth source tree and is slightly
changed to fit with Fth.  Ficl is more or less ANS compatible.  The
Fth library contains object type extensions like arrays, hashs,
strings, regexp etc.  A GC tries to handle memory management of
object types.  Fth is known to build with 
.Xr clang 1
as well as with
.Xr gcc 1 .
.\"
.\" WHERE IS FTH LOCATED?
.\"
.Sh WHERE IS FTH LOCATED?
You can get the latest archive from
.Pa http://www.sf.net/projects/fth/ .
If you prefer svn, you can get the source code from
.Pa svn.code.sf.net/p/fth/code/ .
Check out the source tree with
.Bd -literal -compact
% svn checkout svn://svn.code.sf.net/p/fth/code/trunk fth
.Ed
and update it later with
.Bd -literal -compact
% svn update
.Ed
in the new fth directory.
.\"
.\" REQUIREMENTS
.\"
.Sh REQUIREMENTS
The interactive Fth interpreter supports tcsh-like command-line editing
with the
.Xr tecla 7 
library.  You can find a copy at
.Pa http://www.astro.caltech.edu/~mcs/tecla/libtecla-1.6.2.tar.gz .
If you won't use 
.Xr tecla 7 ,
you can configure Fth without it, see
.Sx "CONFIGURE FTH" .
.Pp
Bignumbers are supported by 
.Xr bn 3
from openssl.
.Ss 64-Bit-NetBSD and Tecla
The libtecla package on
.Nx
provides a static library
.Pa libtecla.a .
On 64-bit machines this package should be compiled with:
.Dl cd /usr/pkgsrc/devel/libtecla
.Dl env CFLAGS=-fPIC make install clean
.\"
.\" CONFIGURE FTH
.\"
.Sh CONFIGURE FTH
There are a few additional configure options which may be of interest.
.Bl -tag -width MMM -compact
.It Fl Fl disable\(hyshared
Disable shared library support.
.It Fl Fl enable\(hywarnings
Enable C compiler warning flags.
.It Fl Fl enable\(hymaintainer\(hymode
\(oqmake maintainer-clean\(cq removes files which need special
developer utilities.  Use this option with caution.
.It Fl Fl program\(hyprefix
.It Fl Fl program\(hysuffix
.It Fl Fl program\(hytransform\(hyname
More than one version of fth may be installed at the same time.  You
can manipulate the name to achieve this, for example:
.Dl % ./configure --program-suffix=-1.3
.Dl % make test install
installs the interpreter as fth-1.3, the library as libfth-1.3.so,
creates a library path /usr/local/lib/fth-1.3 for local dynamic
libs and installs the header files in /usr/local/include/fth-1.3:
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Pa /usr/local/bin/fth-1.3
.It Pa /usr/local/lib/libfth-1.3.so
.It Pa /usr/local/lib/fth-1.3/
.It Pa /usr/local/include/fth-1.3/
.El
.It Fl Fl with\(hytecla\(hyprefix[=DIR]
If the
.Xr tecla 7
command-line editing library is installed in other places than
$prefix/{include,lib} or /usr/{include,lib}, take this configure option.
configure will add -IDIR/include to $(CFLAGS) and -LDIR/lib to
$(LDFLAGS).
.It Fl Fl without\(hytecla
Don't use the 
.Xr tecla 7
command-line editing library.
.El
.Pp
Makefile knows the following targets:
.Bl -diag
.It all
.It clean
.It distclean
.It fth\(hyshared
.It fth\(hystatic
.It install
.It install\(hyshared
.It install\(hystatic
.It install\(hystrip
.It maintainer\(hyclean
.It test
.It uninstall
.El
.\"
.\" INSTALL FTH
.\"
.Sh INSTALL FTH
The usual way to configure and install Fth is:
.Bd -literal -compact
% ./configure CFLAGS=\(dq-g -O2 -Wall\(dq
% make
% make test # optional
% make install
.Ed
Or with options mentioned above and a single make command line:
.Bd -literal -compact
% ./configure --with-tecla-prefix=/my/tecla/prefix CFLAGS=\(dq-g -O2\(dq
% make test install
.Ed
./configure -h presents all configure options.
While testing (make test) two environment variables are checked:
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Dv FTH_TEST_IO
.It Dv FTH_TEST_FILE
.El
If set, the IO and File test will be executed.  These two tests may
bear problems so they are disabled by default.
.\"
.\" AUTOCONF MACRO FTH_CHECK_LIB
.\"
.Sh AUTOCONF MACRO FTH_CHECK_LIB
An application using the Fth package as extension language can detect
program and library using the autoconf macro FTH_CHECK_LIB which is
located in fth.m4.  This macro tests if the interpreter fth can be
found in $PATH.  If so, it tests if libfth contains complex and
rational numbers.  Eventually it substitutes six variables for
configure.ac.
.Pp
After including FTH_CHECK_LIB in configure.ac call aclocal && autoconf
to update aclocal.m4.
.Bl -tag -width MMM -compact
.It FTH
Set to full path of the interpreter or \(dqno\(dq, e.g.
\(dq/usr/local/bin/fth\(dq.
.It FTH_VERSION
Set to version number of the Fth package or \(dqno\(dq, e.g.
\(dq1.3.1\(dq.
.It FTH_CFLAGS
Set to include path or \(dqno\(dq, e.g. \(dq-I/usr/local/include/fth\(dq.
.It FTH_LIBS
Set to library path or \(dqno\(dq, e.g. \(dq-L/usr/local/lib -lfth\(dq.
.It FTH_HAVE_COMPLEX
Set to \(dqyes\(dq or \(dqno\(dq.
.It FTH_HAVE_RATIO
Set to \(dqyes\(dq or \(dqno\(dq.
.El
.Ss Short configure.ac Example
.Bd -literal -compact
AC_ARG_WITH([forth],
            [AS_HELP_STRING([--with-forth],
                            [use Forth as the extension language])],
            [if test \(dq$withval\(dq = yes ; then
                FTH_CHECK_LIB([AC_DEFINE([HAVE_FORTH])])
            fi])
.Ed
.Ss Long configure.as Example
.Bd -literal -compact
AC_ARG_WITH([forth],
            [AS_HELP_STRING([--with-forth],
                            [use Forth as the extension language])],
            [if test \(dq$withval\(dq = yes ; then
                FTH_CHECK_LIB([AC_DEFINE([HAVE_FORTH])
                               AC_DEFINE([HAVE_EXTENSION_LANGUAGE])
                               if test \(dq$FTH_HAVE_COMPLEX\(dq = yes ; then
                                  AC_DEFINE([HAVE_COMPLEX_TRIG])
                                  AC_DEFINE([HAVE_MAKE_COMPLEX])
                                  AC_DEFINE([HAVE_MAKE_RECTANGULAR])
                               fi
                               if test \(dq$FTH_HAVE_RATIO\(dq = yes ; then
                                  AC_DEFINE([HAVE_MAKE_RATIO])
                               fi
                               AC_SUBST(XEN_CFLAGS, $FTH_CFLAGS)
                               AC_SUBST(XEN_LIBS,   $FTH_LIBS)
                               LOCAL_LANGUAGE=\(dqForth\(dq
                               ac_snd_have_extension_language=yes])
            fi])
.Ed
.\"
.\" RUNNING FTH
.\"
.Sh RUNNING FTH
Fth builds and runs on these systems:
.Ss Current builds
.Bd -literal -compact
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [amd64-portbld-freebsd9.2]
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [i386-portbld-freebsd8.4]
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [i386-mnet-freebsd9.0] (arbornet.org)
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [i386-intel-openbsd5.0] (grex.org)
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [amd64-sdf-netbsd6.1] (sdf.org)
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [x86_64-debian-linux-gnu3.2.0] (freeshell.de)
.Ed
.Ss VirtualBox
.Bd -literal -compact
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [amd64-vbox-freebsd11.0]
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [amd64-vbox-netbsd6.99.24]
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [amd64-vbox-openbsd5.4]
FTH 1.3.7 (2013/10/05) [x86_64-vboxdebian-linux-gnu3.10]
#
FTH 1.3.0 (01-Mar-2012) [i686-vbox-minix3.1.8]
FTH 1.3.0 (01-Mar-2012) [i686-ubuntu-linux-gnu3.0.0]
FTH 1.3.0 (01-Mar-2012) [i686-centos-linux-gnu2.6.32]
.Ed
.Ss More machines
With much help from Bill Schottstaedt, the author of the sound editor
Snd, Fth could be tested on these machines:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact
FTH 0.12.00 (13-Oct-06) [sparc-sun-solaris2.9]      okay
FTH 0.12.00 (13-Sep-06) [i386-pc-solaris2.10]       okay
FTH 0.10.22 (13-Sep-06) [i386-pc-solaris2.9]        okay
FTH 0.10.22 (13-Sep-06) [i686-pc-linux-gnu]         okay
FTH 0.10.22 (13-Sep-06) [powerpc64-linux-gnu]       okay
FTH 0.10.22 (13-Sep-06) [x86_64-linux-gnu]          okay
FTH 0.10.22 (13-Sep-06) [alphaev67-linux-gnu]       not yet
FTH 0.10.22 (13-Sep-06) [i386-freebsd5.4]           okay
FTH 0.10.22 (13-Sep-06) [i386-netbsdelf2.0.2]       okay
FTH 0.10.22 (13-Sep-06) [i386-openbsd3.8]           okay
FTH 0.10.20 (04-Sep-06) [i686-apple-darwin8.7.1]    okay
.Ed
.\" README.man ends here
